I don't normally like to be very
technical because I think that can put
people off cooking but I thought it
might be nice just to explain to you
what sort of meat you're likely to use
when you're making a casserole casserole
in meat usually comes from the fall
quarter of the animal and the fall
quarter is in fact the part of the
animal that pulls the other half along
and it really has to work harder and
because it has to work harder it
developed something called connective
tissue and muscle and that makes the
meat tougher but that has lots of
advantages which I'll explain in a
minute
but let's just have a look at the cuts
through this area here we've got Chuck
and blade this is my favorite cut for
Casa rolling when I want large chunks
because it's nice and lean and then here
we've got neck and clod and this is good
for stewing cutting up in small pieces
and things like steak and kidney pie now
if you live in different parts of the
country to what I do you'll probably
find that this here is called shoulder
and this can be called all sorts of
names like sticking vein and Sloat and
all sorts of weird and wonderful names
like that down here we've got shin
that's a very important cut and also
we've got some more of that in fact on
the hindquarter as well leg which is a
similar cut well that's where they come
from on the animal now I'd like to
explain a little bit about what they
look like when they're cut up when you
see them in the butcher's and I've got
here the blade and the chuck shoulder in
other words and I'd like to explain this
muscle and connective tissue that I've
already mentioned what happens with long
slow cooking is that this connective
tissue here renders down and becomes a
beautiful source and it sort of
internally bastes the meat whilst it's
cooking and this is what gives
casseroles such a lovely flavor in fact
casseroles develop as they cook they get
more and more flavor as they cook which
is interesting
so anyway we'll move on now to the neck
and clod and this
cut up in small pieces this is the sort
that you might use for steak and kidney
pudding or pie and also this is the area
of meat that's probably used for mincing
when you have minced beef and this is
shin of beef here which i think is a
beautiful cut all that connective tissue
cooks down to a beautiful sauce and in
fact it has a beefier flavor than the
best Vinit steak well that's the cuts of
meat then of course you're going to need
a casserole and this is the casserole
that I would recommend a good all-around
casserole for the family now it's made
of very heavy material it's made a very
heavy cast iron which conducts the heat
very evenly and then it's lined inside
with enamel and that's a good size and
the advantage is that you can use it on
top of the stove or you can transfer it
to the oven and you can also I think
it's pretty enough to take to the tailor
so that's a good all-around family
casserole it's an investment it costs a
few pennies but it will last you a
lifetime
and be very useful so there's the
casserole once you've got the meat and
the casserole then you can really have
fun because there's no end to what you
can do with spices and ingredients and
flavors you can make all sorts of things
but what I'd like to have a look at now
is the sort of liquids that you can use
because they can add a lot of character
and flavor of their own first of all
beef stock made with bones that we saw
last week and they're next in the line
they're pale ale and that really does
transform in about two hours cooking two
and a half hours that develops into a
beautiful flavored sauce and permeates
the whole kitchen next door to that
we've got stout and again that has
similar qualities I like to use slices
of braising steak and lots of onions and
chuck a bit of stout over and really at
the end of long slow cooking that's as
good as any rump steak and you've only
used braising steak here we've got red
wine very special has all the right
qualities but is very expensive and so
what I like to do is keep handy in my
kitchen some dry cider and I said
emphasise dry because sweet cider is not
the same for
cooking and also I try to use a still
cider which i think is better than the
fizzy stuff and you'll be surprised at
how good cider is for cooking and so
much cheaper and any recipe that you
come across that asked for wine and you
can't afford it then take it from me you
can use dry cider and it'll taste every
bit as good even that birth beginning on
that we saw at the beginning of the
program can be made with dry cider